---
title: Computer Science (Theory) for Class 12 (NEB)
date: 2022-11-29 15:00:25 + 0545
categories: [Computer Science, Class 12]
tags: [notes, class 12, computer science, thoery]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: ajay
math: true
mermaid: true
---
## **1. Database Management System (DBMS)**

### **1.1 Introduction to data, database, Database system, DBMS**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **1.2 Introduction to data, database, Database system, DBMS**

### **1.3 Advantages of using DBMS**

### **1.4 DDL (Data Definition Language) and DML (Data Manipulation Language)**

### **1.5 Database Model: Network Model, Hierarchical Model, Relational database model**

### **1.6 Concept of Normalization: 1NF, 2NF, 3NF**

### **1.7 Centralized Vs. Distributed Database**

### **1.8 Database Security**

## **2. Data Communication and Networking**

### **2.1 Basic elements of Communication System:**

Communication is the act of transmission of information. Every living creature within the world experiences the necessity to impart or receive information, virtually unceasingly, with alternatives in the closed world. For communication to be successful, it’s essential that the sender and the receiver perceive a standard language.
Humans have perpetually created endeavors to enhance the standard of communication with other human beings. Languages and the ways utilized in communication have been unbroken, evolving from prehistoric to fashionable times, to fulfil the growing demands in terms of speed and quality of information.  

Communication System that relies on the electronics means is known as Electronic Communication Systems and similarly Digital Communication System if the electronics are digital which are mostly used these days.  

> ***The basic components of a communication system are***  
>
i. Information Source  
ii. Transmitter  
iii. Communication Channel  
iv. Receiver  
v. Destination  
{: .prompt-tip}

***Information Source:***  

We know that communication systems are the art of information exchange. Therefore, to establish communication we need some type of information. This information originates from the information source.  
> The information generated by the source may be in the form of sound (human speech), picture (image source), words etc.
{: .prompt-tip}

***Transmitter:***  

The transmitter is a device which converts the signal produced by the source into a form that is suitable for transmission over a given channel or medium. Transmitters use a technique called modulation to convert the electrical signal into a form that is suitable for transmission over a given channel or medium.  

When we send the signal over larger distances, it undergoes various circumstances which makes the signal weak. To send the signals over larger distances, without the effect of any external interferences or noise addition and without getting faded away, it must undergo a process called modulation. Modulation increases the strength of a signal without changing the parameters of the original signal. Thus, the resulting signal overcomes the various effects which make it become weak.  

***Communication Channel:***

The communication channel is a medium through which the signal travels.  

>***Communication channels are divided into two categories:***
>
>i. Guided Channel  
>ii. Unguided Channel
>
>If the channel does not allow the signal following through the medium to escape out of medium, then it is said to be Guided Medium or channel otherwise it is Unguided Channel or Medium. For example, wired communication systems use guided medium as wire and wireless communications systems use unguided medium as open space.
{: .prompt-tip}

***Receiver:***

The receiver is a device that receives the signal from the channel and converts the signal back to its original form (light and sound) which is understandable by humans at the destination.  

***Destination:***

The destination is the final stage in the communication system. Generally, humans at some places are considered as the destination. A destination is a place where this information is supposed to be consumed.

### **2.2 Concept of Communication System**

The word Communication (derived from the Latin ‘Communicare’ it means ‘to share’) is the act of sharing ideas, emotions, and feelings between two or more people.  

We are aware of the need for and importance of communication as it is a general phenomenon. Nowadays communication is playing a vital role in every step of an individual. Wherever life exists, communication also exists.

The history of communication itself can be traced back since the origin of speech. The use of technology in communication may be considered since the first use of symbols about 30,000 years BCE. Among the symbols used, there are cave paintings, petroglyphs, pictograms and ideograms. Writing was a major innovation, as well as printing technology and, more recently, telecommunications and the Internet.

The history of telecommunication - the transmission of signals over a distance for the purpose of communication - began thousands of years ago with the use of smoke signals and drums in Africa, America and parts of Asia. In the 1790s the first fixed semaphore systems emerged in Europe however it was not until the 1830s that electrical telecommunication systems started to appear.

### **2.3 Block Diagram of communication System /Model**

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    A(Information Source) -->|Message| B(Input Transducer);
    B(Input Transducer) -->|Electrical Signal| C(Transmitter);
    C(Transmitter) -->|Electrical Signal| D(Channel);
    E(Noise) -->|Random Signal| D(Channel);
    D(Channel) -->|Electrical Signal| F(Reciever);
    F(Reciever) -->|Electrical Signal| G(Output Transducer);
    G(Output Transducer) -->|Electrical Signal| H(Destination);
```

### **2.4 Elements of Data Communication/Transmission**

[Refer to 2.1](/posts/Theory_12_Notes/#21-basic-elements-of-communication-system)

### **2.5 Simplex, Half duplex and Full duplex communication mode**

Data communication happens in the form of signals between two or more computing devices or nodes. The transfer  of  data  happens over a point-to-point  or multipoint communication channel. Data communication between different devices are broadly categorised into 3 types: Simplex communication, Halfduplex communication, and Full-duplex communication.

***Simplex Communication System***

In Simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional, as on a one-way street. Only one of the two devices on a link can transmit, the other can only receive. The simplex mode can use the entire capacity of the channel to send data in one direction.
Example: Keyboard and traditional monitors. The keyboard can only introduce input, the monitor can only give the output.

***Half Duplex Communication System***

In half-duplex mode, each station can both transmit and receive, but not at the same time. While one device is sending, the other can only receive, and vice versa. The half-duplex mode is used in cases where there is no need for communication in both directions at the same time. The entire capacity of the channel can be utilized for each direction.
Example: Walkie-talkie in which message is sent one at a time and messages are sent in both directions.

>Channel capacity=Bandwidth * Propagation Delay
{: .prompt-tip}

### **2.6 Concept of LAN and WAN**

Local Area Network (LAN) is a computer network, which is limited to a small area such as small office, single building, multiple buildings inside a campus etc. Typically, a Local Area Network (LAN) is a private network owned and maintained by a single organization.  
A Wide Area Network (WAN) spans over multiple geographic locations, which is composed of multiple LANs. It is nearly impossible for a small to medium organization (except Network Service Providers) to pull network cables between their two offices in two different countries located 1000s of kilometers away. Network Service Providers (also called as ISPs) provide the connectivity solutions for Wide Area Networks (WAN).  

***Differences between LAN and WAN***

* A Local Area Network (LAN) is a private computer network that connects computers in small physical areas. Example: A small office, A Single building, Multiple buildings inside a campus etc. Wide Area Networks (WAN) is type of computer network to connect offices which are located in different geographical locations. Wide Area Network (WAN) depends mainly on Internet Service Providers (ISPs) for connection solutions.

* Local Area Network (LAN) has higher bandwidth rates. Current Local Area Networks (LANs) runs at bandwidth speeds of 100 Mbps, 1 Gbps or 10 Gbps. Wide Area Networks (WAN) has lower bandwidth rates compared with Local Area Network (LAN). Current Wide Area Networks runs on bandwidths of 20 Mbps, 50 Mbps or 100 Mbps.

* Local Area Network (LAN) bandwidth rates are almost constant. Local Area Network (LAN) bandwidth rates are dependent on characteristics of the LAN technology in use (Normally FastEthernet or Gigabit Ethernet). Since most of Wide Area Networks (WAN) connectivity solutions are dependent on Internet Service Providers (ISPs), budget related constraints affect the quality of WAN.

* Most of the current Local Area Networks (LANs) use Ethernet as the LAN Standard (FastEthernet 100 Mbps, or Gigabit Ethernet 1/10 Gbps). Normally for WAN connectivity, technologies like VPN (Virtual Private Network) over Internet, or MPLS (Multi-Protocol Label Switching) are used.

* Since Local Area Networks (LANs) are private networks, managed by dedicated local network administrators, Local Area Networks (LANs) are more reliable and secure than Wide Area Networks (WANs). Since Wide Area Networks (WANs) involve third-party service providers, WAN networks are less reliable and secure.

* Initial set-up costs for Local Area Networks (LANs) are low as the devices required to set up the networks are cheap. Initial set-up costs for Wide Area Networks (WANs) are high, because of the devices (Routers, Firewalls etc.), cables and manpower required.

* Local Area Networks (LANs) running costs are less Wide Area Networks (WANs) running costs are high. Wide Area Networks (WANs) normally have recurring monthly cost as Service Provider access fees.

### **2.7 Transmission Medium: Guided and Unguided**

A transmission medium is a system or substance that can mediate the propagation of signals for the purposes of telecommunication. Signals are typically imposed on a wave of some kind suitable for the chosen medium. For example, data can modulate sound, and a transmission medium for sounds may be air, but solids and liquids may also act as the transmission medium. Vacuum or air constitutes a good transmission medium for electromagnetic waves such as light and radio waves. While material substance is not required for electromagnetic waves to propagate, such waves are usually affected by the transmission media they pass through, for instance, by absorption or reflection or refraction at the interfaces between media. Technical devices can therefore be employed to transmit or guide waves. Thus, an optical fiber or a copper cable is used as transmission media.  

***Guided Medium***

Guided Medium are those medium from which signal travels from one point (namely source) to another point (lets say destination) within the range or some kind of boundary. For as example optical fibre, twisted copper cable, co-axial cable. Signals inside these medium travels from the boundary of the coductor and never leaves the boundary. Hence these mediums are said to be *Guided Medium*  

***Unguided Medium***

Unguided Medium are those medium from which signal travels from one point (namely source) to another point (lets say destination) without any range or boundary. For as example wireless singnals, Electromagnetic waves etc. Signals in the unguided medium has no definite path and limitation. Hence these mediums are said to be *Unguided Medium*  

### **2.8 Transmission impairments terminology (Jitter, Singing, Echo, Crosstalk, Distortion, Noise, Bandwidth, Number of receivers)**

In communication system, analog signals travel through transmission media, which tends to deteriorate the quality of analog signal, which means that the signal at the beginning of the medium is not the same as the signal  at the end of the medium. The imperfection causes signal impairment. Below are the causes of the impairment.

***Jitter***

Jitter period is the interval between two times of maximum effect (or minimum effect) of a signal characteristic that varies regularly with time. Jitter frequency, the more commonly quoted figure, is its inverse.  

Jitter may be caused by electromagnetic interference and crosstalk with carriers of other signals. Jitter can cause a display monitor to flicker, affect the performance of processors in personal computers, introduce clicks or other undesired effects in audio signals, and cause loss of transmitted data between network devices. The amount of tolerable jitter depends on the affected application.

***Echo***

When the signal from the source is sent to the destination and somehow there is any link from destination to source may be partially or fully then the signal repeats itself. This repeatation of the signal after the certain time delay is known as Echo.

***Singing***

An extended form of Echo where continuosly feed from destination to source is linked, then the signal linked back is amplified each time with available noise which may finally raise the sitaution of ungenerated and unwanted noise without any input. This effect is known as singing.

***Crosstalk***

his is the effect caused when signal transmitted on one channel creates an unwanted effect in another channel during communication. Simply when one signal is shared in two or more transmission system then there arises cross talk. It reduces the quality of communication.

***Distortion***

The change in original transmitted signal waveform is known as distortion. Due to distortion receiver denote receive the original signal rather distorted signal is received. This reduces quality of communication and is one of the reason for network impairments.

***Noise***

The random or unwanted signal that mixes up with the original signal is called noise. There are several types of noise such as induced noise, crosstalk noise, thermal noise and impulse noise which may corrupt the signal. Induced noise comes from sources such as motors and appliances. These devices act as sending antenna and transmission medium act as receiving antenna. Thermal noise is movement of electrons in wire which creates an extra signal.  

***Bandwidth***

The rate of data transmission in a given medium per unit time is known as bandwidth . It is generally measured in terms of bps, Kbps, Mbps etc. Higher the bandwidth, higher will be the data transmission and faster will be the communication. But if bandwidth is low then it leads to network congestion causing network impairments.  

***Number of Recievers***

Number of Recievers in the Data Communication field is more important factor for the analysis of network or communication quality. The number of devices connected to the network or communication system actually effect the network congestion and those congestion may block the passage of data frequently .  

### **2.9 Basic concept of Networks Architecture: Client-Server and Peer-to-peer**

### **2.10 Some Basic Terms and Tool Used in Computer Network: IP Address, Sub Net Mask and Gateway, MAC address, Internet, Intranet, Extranet**

### **2.11 Network Tool: Packet tracer, Remote Login**

### **2.12 Network Connecting Devices: NIC, Modem, router, switch**

### **2.13 Network Topologies: Bus, Ring and star topology**

### **2.14 Basic Concept OSI Reference Model**

### **2.15 Internet Protocol Addressing**

## **3. Web Technology II**

### **3.1 Introduction**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **3.2 Server side and Client Side Scripting**

### **3.3 Introduction of internet technology**

### **3.4 Adding Java script to HTML page**

### **3.5 Java script fundamental**

### **3.6 Java Script Data types**

### **3.7 Variables and operators**

### **3.8 Functions and control structure if-else, if-elseif, switch-case, for, while, do while loop**

### **3.9 Object based programming with Java Script and Event handling**

### **3.10 Image, event and form objects**

### **3.11 Form validation, JQuery**

### **3.12 Server Side Scripting using PHP**

### **3.13 Introduction to PHP: Hardware and Software Requirements**

### **3.14 Object oriented programming with server side scripting**

### **3.15 Basic PHP syntax**

### **3.16 PHP data types**

### **3.17 Basic Programming in PHP**

### **3.18 Operators (Arithmetic, logical, comparison, operator precedence)**

### **3.19 Variables Manipulation**

### **3.20 Database Connectivity**

### **3.21 Connecting server side script to database**

### **3.22 Making SQL queries**

### **3.23 Fetching data sets getting data about data**

### **3.24 Creating SQL database with server side scripting**

## **4. Programming in C**

### **4.1 Review of C programming concept**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **4.2 Functions**

### **4.2.1 Concept of library and user defined functions and advantages**

### **4.2.2 Function definition, Prototype, call and return statements**

### **4.2.3 Accessing a Function by passing values**

### **4.2.4 Concept of storage: automatic and external**

### **4.2.5 Concept of Recursion: factorial and Fibonacci problems**

### **4.3 Structures and Unions**

### **4.3.1 Structure: Definition, Declaration, Initialization and Size of Structure**

### **4.3.2 Accessing member of structure**

### **4.3.3 Array of structure**

### **4.3.4 Union: Definition, Declaration**

### **4.3.5 Difference between union and structure**

### **4.4 Pointers**

### **4.4.1 Definition of Pointer**

### **4.4.2 Address (&) and indirection (*) operator**

### **4.4.3 Pointer Expression and Assignment**

### **4.4.4 Call by values and call by reference**

### **4.5 Working with Files**

### **4.5.1 Concept of Data File**

### **4.5.2 Sequential and Random File**

### **4.5.3 File manipulation function: putw, getw, putc, getc, fscanf, fprintf**

### **4.5.4 Opening, Reading, Writing and Appending data file**

## **5. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)**

### **5.1 Programming paradigms: procedural, structural and object oriented**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **5.2 Features of OOP: Class, Object, Polymorphism and Inheritance**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **5.3 Advantages of OOP**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **5.4 Application of OOP**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

## **6. Software Process Model (SPM)**

### **6.1 Software Project Concept**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **6.2 Concept of software development process**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **6.3 Concept SDLC life cycle**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **6.4 System Analyst Vs Software Engineer**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **6.5 Requirement Collection Methods**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **6.6 Concept of system design**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **6.7 Software and quality**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **6.8 Software development model: waterfall, prototype, agile**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

## **7. Recent Trends in Technology**

### **7.1 Concept of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Robotics**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  
The physical parts that make up a computer (the central processing unit, input, output, and memory) are called hardware. Programs that tell a computer what to do are called software. A set of instructions that perform a particular task is called a program, software program, or software. Peripherals are any hardware device connected to a computer, any part of the computer outside the CPU and working memory. Some examples of peripherals are keyboards, the mouse, monitors, printers, scanners, disk and tape drives, microphones, speakers, joysticks, plotters, and cameras. Computer is an advanced electronic device that takes raw data as input from the user and processes these data under the control of set of instructions (called program) and gives the result (output) and saves output for the future use. It can process both numerical and non-numerical (arithmetic and logical) calculations.

### **7.2 Concept of Cloud Computing**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **7.3 Concept of Big Data**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.  

### **7.4 Concept of Virtual Reality**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **7.5 Concept of e-com, e-medicine, e-gov**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **7.6 Concept of Mobile Computing**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.

### **7.7 Concept of Internet of things (IoT)**

A computer is an electronic device, operating under the control of instructions stored in its own memory that can accept data (input), process the data according to specified rules, produce information (output), and store the information for future use.
